---
layout: toc-page
title: On Collaborative Development
id: collab_dev
lang: en
---

# On Collaborative Development

Spinnaker is open source, but many of the people working on it do so
as their day job. To avoid forcing people to be "at work" effectively
24x7, we want to establish some semi-formal protocols around
development. Hopefully, these protocols ensure things will go
smoothly. If you find that this is not the case, please complain
loudly.

## Patches Welcome

First and foremost, as a potential contributor, your changes and ideas
are welcome at any hour of the day or night, weekdays, weekends, and
holidays. Please do not ever hesitate to ask a question or send a PR.

## Code Reviews

All changes must be code reviewed. For non-maintainers, this is
obvious, since you can't commit anyway. But even for maintainers, we
want all changes to get at least one review, preferably (for
non-trivial changes obligatorily) from someone who knows the areas the
change touches. For non-trivial changes, we may want two
reviewers. The primary reviewer will make this decision and nominate a
second reviewer, if needed. Except for trivial changes, PRs should not
be committed until relevant parties (e.g., owners of the subsystems
affected by the PR) have had a reasonable chance to look at the PR in
their local business hours.

Most PRs will find reviewers organically. If a maintainer intends to
be the primary reviewer of a PR, they should set themselves as the
assignee on GitHub and say so in a reply to the PR. Only the primary
reviewer of a change should actually do the merge, except in rare
cases (e.g., they are unavailable in a reasonable timeframe).

If the PR has gone two work days without an owner emerging, please
poke the PR thread and ask for a reviewer to be assigned.

Except for rare cases, such as trivial changes (e.g., typos or
comments) or emergencies (e.g., broken builds), maintainers should not
merge their own changes.

## Assigned Reviews

Maintainers can assign reviews to other maintainers, when
appropriate. The assignee becomes the shepherd for that PR and is
responsible for merging the PR once they are satisfied with it or else
closing it. The assignee might request reviews from non-maintainers.

## Merge Hours

Mantainers will do merges of appropriately reviewed-and-approved
changes during their local business hours (e.g., between 7:00am Monday
to 5:00pm (17:00h) Friday). Complex or controversial PRs that arrive over the weekend or on
holidays will only be merged if there is a very good reason for it and
if the code review requirements have been met. Concretely, this means
that no one should merge complex or controversial changes immediately before going to bed for
the night.

There may be discussion and even approvals granted outside of the
above hours, but merges will generally be deferred.

If a PR is considered complex or controversial, the merge of that PR
should be delayed to give all interested parties in all timezones the
opportunity to provide feedback. Concretely, this means that such PRs
should be held for 24 hours before merging. Of course, "complex" and
"controversial" are left to the judgement of the people involved, but
we trust that part of being a committer is having the judgement
required to evaluate such things honestly, and not be motivated by
your desire (or your cube-mate's desire) to get their code
merged. Also, see "Holds" below - any reviewer can issue a "hold" to
indicate that the PR is, in fact, complicated or complex and deserves
further review.

PRs that are incorrectly judged to be mergeable - e.g., if subsequent
reviewers believe they are controversial or complex - may be reverted
and subject to re-review.

## Holds

Any maintainer or core contributor who wants to review a PR but does
not have time immediately may put a hold on a PR simply by saying so
on the PR discussion, and offer an ETA, measured in single-digit days
at most, by when to provide the review. Any PR that has a hold shall
not be merged until the person who requested the hold acks the review,
withdraws their hold, or is over-ruled by a preponderence of
maintainers.
